# M1-MarkovQuilts

1. **MarkovQuilts**

This computational system is titled MarkovQuilts, and offers users a baseline system for digital quilt-making! Markov chains are the engine behind this system, as patch designs can be uploaded to the repository and then be assigned specific transition proabilities.
The transition matrix in this system acts as a "design dial," allowing each user to tailor their quilt generation to their personal preferences. Changing the transition probabilities of a given matrix has immediate and visual design impacts. For example, increasing the probability of a given patch following itself will increase clustering and changing the starting patch will inherently alter the quilting process. Furthermore, different patch images can be uploaded to the *assets* folder, which changes the building blocks of the quilting system and can have significant impact on contrast and visual aesthetic. Three template matrices have been created to offer a starting point for multiple strategies of quilting. 

The randomized transition matrix offers an approach that will lend itself to "improv" quilting, where design decisions are made spontaneously and without extensive planning. Examples of such randomized, improvised output can be observed in the *examples* folder (files generated_quilt(1).png, generated_quilt(2).png, and generated_quilt(3).png). 

The other matrices reflect a more rules-based design structure, as the matrices are constructed to create quilts with uniformly toned patches. A sample matrix is provided for both warm- and cool-toned quilts. The respective outputs can be observed in the *examples* folder (generated_quilt(4).png and generated_quilt(5).png).

The possibilities for expansion of this system are numerous, as additional matrices could be designed to specifically investigate symmetry, unity, and shapes.

2. **Set-up + Running Code**

This public repository can be utilized to generate digital patchwork quilts, using Python scripts and libraries. Necessary libraries/imports include pillow, random, and matplotlib. If pillow is not yet installed on a machine, open a terminal window and run the following command: python3 -m pip install Pillow

Other imports include matplotlib, an open-source Python library helpful for static visualizations, and random, which provides 
functions to generate random numbers and utilize random operations. These imports are included in the markov_quilt.py script.

**markov_quilt.py**: the main Python script in this computationally creative system -- contains mutable transition matrix to be used to guide the design process. Overall workflow runs as follows: starting patch is hard-coded by user, then next patches are generated according to transition matrix. Images are pulled from the *assets* folder to prepare for visual generation. An 8x6 subplot is generated using matplotlib to visually model the quilt. Dimensions can be altered by the user depending on desired quilt size. Index variable (idx) can be edited to reflect the specific quilt generated (unique number identity helps to keep each design distinct/traceable). When the markov_quilt.py script is executed, the output is then saved with the unique number identifier to the *examples* folder.

**assets**: a folder housing the patch designs to be utilized

**examples**: storage folder for saved outputs -- example quilts generated using different transition matrices

3. **System Motivation/Inspiration**

My primary motivation for creating the MarkovQuilts system is in technical pursuit of a long-standing goal to attempt to learn how to knit, sew, crochet, and craft. About two years ago, I learned how to hand-knit a chunky blanket and fell in love with both the process and the product. However, since then, I have not had the chance to explore quilting on my own. This project, focused on using Markov chains to generate visual art, felt like an apt time to digitize this goal of mine. I chose to model quilts because of their storytelling capabilities and unique style. Each quilt created inherently models the creator's journey as each patch is stitched to another. They are a physical display of change or consistency over time, as made evident by either their uniform or improvised style. For the purpose of this assignment, I felt as though I could take the first few steps toward my goal by creating a template for digital quilt generation. The system is purposefully designed with an easy-to-personalize design, so that each user can add patches they wish to make up the parts of their quilt. In other words, the system is designed to aid the personal storytelling of each user.

Working on this system challenged me as a computer scientist both conceptually and technically. Conceptually, it took me time to decide on an idea for a system that I felt passionate about constructing related to visual art and that I felt I could accurately model. I wanted to choose a visual art concept that was unique and not something I would have combined with technology upon first thought. I think that this will be an exciting theme for me throughout this course because I am looking forward to utilizing technology in ways that I had not previously considered. As for technical challenges, I have had little experience with coding visualizations since the very beginning of my computer science journey. Therefore, diving into the capabilities of matplotlib and graphing, combining, and formatting images were skills I honed when designing my system. This was an important challenge for me because I was able to start with an open-ended prompt, choose a direction to pursure, execute a plan based on that direction, and generate a successful computational system. That process of technical innovation and execution definitely pushed me out of my comfort zone. Most of my programming experience has been in organized and objective-oriented tasks with very clear processes/instructions. This project, however, challenged me to think outside the box and take steps that were not outlined to achieve my technical goal. Next steps for me include designing more original computational systems that are even more complex. I want to expand my skills regarding library and import usage in order to tap into the enormous amount of open-source technical tools available. I look forward to future challenges where I can build on these skills to create multi-step, multi-medium, and larger computationally creative systems.

In regard to the creativity of my system, I believe it demonstrates p-creativity because for each user, the quilt they generate with the patches they choose to upload is psychologically creative for them. It allows for a personal storytelling process via digital quilt generation. For example, my favorite of the quilts I generated is the one dominated by cool tones of blue. I love that quilt because blue is my favorite color, but also because some of the cooler patch designs I chose remind me of the ocean and swimming, which I love to do. I also think that my system is novel as it puts a new spin on a historically significant process deeply roted in tradition. This digital angle offers a new way to appreciate such beautiful art, giving it value. For those reasons, I would hope that my system is considered p-creative and creative in the way that it offers novelty and value to the computationally creative world.

4. **Acknowledgements**

Sources include https://www.mywebquilter.com/ for initial patch template inventory and https://matplotlib.org/ for function details and library capabilities utilized (tight_layout). Interpersonal sources include discussion with classmate Logan and Professor Harmon.
